---
title: 4.1 Overview
---
The rules listed below explicitly address what and how parts and materials may be used on a 2016 FIRST Robotics Competition ROBOT. There are many reasons for the structure of the rules, including safety, reliability, parity, creation of a reasonable design challenge, adherence to professional standards, impact on the competition, compatibility with the Kit of Parts (KOP), which is the collection of items listed on any Kickoff Kit Checklists, distributed via FIRST Choice, or obtained via a Product Donation Voucher (PDV), etc.

Another intent of these rules is to have all energy sources and active actuation systems on the ROBOT (e.g. batteries, compressors, motors, servos, cylinders, and their controllers) drawn from a well-defined set of options. This is to ensure that all Teams have access to the same actuation resources and that the Inspectors are able to accurately assess the legality of a given part.

FIRST Robotics Competition ROBOTS are made up of COMPONENTS and MECHANISMS. A COMPONENT is any part in its most basic configuration, which cannot be disassembled without damaging or
destroying the part or altering its fundamental function. A MECHANISM is a COTS or custom assembly of COMPONENTS that provide specific functionality on the ROBOT. A MECHANISM can be disassembled (and then reassembled) into individual COMPONENTS without damage to the parts.

Many rules in this section reference Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) items. A COTS item must be a standard (i.e. not custom order) part commonly available from a VENDOR for all Teams for purchase. To be a COTS item, the COMPONENT or MECHANISM must be in an unaltered, unmodified state. Items that are no longer commercially available but are functionally equivalent to the original condition as delivered from the VENDOR are considered COTS and may be used.

>Example 1: A Team orders two (2) ROBOT grippers from RoboHands Corp. and receives both items. They put one in their storeroom and plan to use it later. Into the other, they drill “lightening holes” to reduce weight. The first gripper is still classified as a COTS item, but the second gripper is now a FABRICATED ITEM, as it has been modified.
>
>Example 2: A Team obtains openly available blueprints of a drive module commonly available from Wheels-R-Us Inc. and has local machine shop “We-Make-It, Inc.” manufacture a copy of the part for them. The produced part is NOT a COTS item, because it is not commonly carried as part of the standard stock of We-Make-It, Inc.
>
>Example 3: A Team obtains openly available design drawings from a professional publication during the pre-season, and uses them to fabricate a gearbox for their ROBOT during the build period following Kickoff. The design drawings are considered a COTS item, and may be used as “raw material” to fabricate the gearbox. The finished gearbox itself would be a FABRICATED ITEM, and not a COTS item.
>
>Example 4: A COTS part that has non-functional label markings added would still be considered a COTS part, but a COTS part that has device-specific mounting holes added is a FABRICATED ITEM.
>
> Example 5: A team has a COTS single-board processor version 1.0, which can no longer be purchased. Only the COTS single-board processor version 2.0 may be purchased. If the COTS single-board processor version 1.0 is functionally equivalent to its original condition, it may be used.
>
> Example 6: A team has a COTS gearbox which has been discontinued. If the COTS gearbox is functionally equivalent to its original condition, it may be used.

A VENDOR is a legitimate business source for COTS items that satisfies all of the following criteria:

A. has a Federal Tax Identification number. In cases where the VENDOR is outside of the United States, they must possess an equivalent form of registration or license with the government of their home nation that establishes and validates their status as a legitimate business licensed to operate within that country.

B. is not a “wholly owned subsidiary” of an FIRST Robotics Competition Team or collection of FIRST Robotics Competition Teams. While there may be some individuals affiliated with both an FIRST Robotics Competition Team and the VENDOR, the business and activities of the Team and VENDOR must be completely separable.

C. must be able to ship any general (i.e., non-FIRST unique) product within five business days of receiving a valid purchase request. It is recognized that certain unusual circumstances (such as 1,000 FIRST Teams all ordering the same part at once from the same VENDOR) may cause atypical delays in shipping due to backorders for even the largest VENDORs. Such delays due to higher-than-normal order rates are excused.

D. should maintain sufficient stock or production capability to fill Teams’ orders within a reasonable period during the season (less than 1 week). (Note that this criterion may not apply to custom-built items from a source that is both a VENDOR and a fabricator. For example, a VENDOR may sell flexible belting that the Team wishes to procure to use as treads on their drive system. The VENDOR cuts the belting to a custom length from standard shelf stock that is typically available, welds it into a loop to make a tread, and ships it to a Team. The fabrication of the tread takes the VENDOR two weeks. This would be considered a FABRICATED ITEM, and the two weeks ship time is acceptable.) Alternately, the Team may decide to fabricate the treads themselves. To satisfy this criterion, the VENDOR would just have to ship a length of belting from shelf stock (i.e. a COTS item) to the Team within five business days and leave the welding of the cuts to the Team.)

E. makes their products available to all FIRST Robotics Competition Teams. VENDOR must not limit supply or make a product available to just a limited number of FIRST Robotics Competition Teams.

> The intent of this definition it to be as inclusive as possible to permit access to all legitimate sources, while preventing ad hoc organizations from providing special-purpose products to a limited subset of Teams in an attempt to circumvent the cost accounting rules.
>
>FIRST desires to permit Teams to have the broadest choice of legitimate sources possible, and to obtain COTS items from the sources that provide them with the best prices and level of service available. Teams also need to protect against long delays in availability of parts that will impact their ability to complete their ROBOT. The FIRST Robotics Competition build season is brief, so the VENDOR must be able to get their product, particularly FIRST unique items, to a Team in a timely manner.
>
>Ideally, chosen VENDORS should have national distributors (e.g. Home Depot, Lowes, MSC, Radio Shack, McMaster-Carr, etc.). Remember, FIRST Robotics Competition events are not always near home – when parts fail, local access to replacement materials is often critical.

A FABRCATED ITEM is any COMPONENT or MECHANISM that has been altered, built, cast, constructed, concocted, created, cut, heat treated, machined, manufactured, modified, painted, produced, surface coated, or conjured partially or completely into the final form in which it will be used on the ROBOT.

> Note that it is possible for an item (typically raw materials) to be neither COTS nor a FABRICATED ITEM. For example, a 20 ft. length of aluminum which has been cut into 5ft. pieces for transport is neither COTS (it’s not in the state received from the VENDOR), nor a FABRICATED ITEM (the cuts were not made to advance the part towards it’s final form on the ROBOT).

Teams may be asked to provide documentation proving legality of non-2016 KOP items during Inspection where a Rule specifies limits for a legal part (e.g. pneumatic items, current limits, COTS electronics, etc.).

Some of these rules make use of English unit requirements for parts. If your team has a question about a metric-equivalent part’s legality, please e-mail your question to frcparts@firstinspires.org for an official ruling. To seek approval for alternate devices for inclusion in future FIRST Robotics Competition seasons, please contact frcparts@firstinspires.org with item specifications.

Teams should acknowledge the support provided by the corporate Sponsors and Mentors with an appropriate display of their school and Sponsors names and/or logos (or the name of the supporting youth organization, if appropriate).

FIRST Robotics Competition can be a full-contact ROBOT competition and may include rigorous game play. While Game and ROBOT Rules limit severe damage to ROBOTS, Teams should design their ROBOTS to be
robust.
