---
title: G11
---
Strategies aimed solely at forcing the opposing ALLIANCE to violate a rule are not in the spirit of FIRST Robotics Competition and not allowed. Rule violations forced in this manner will not result in an assignment of a penalty to the targeted ALLIANCE.

_Violation: FOUL. If egregious or repeated, YELLOW CARD_

>G11 does not apply for strategies consistent with standard gameplay, e.g. a TEAM obtaining a BOULDER from their SECRET PASSAGE, CROSSING an opponent DEFENSE, etc. G11 requires an intentional act with limited or no opportunity for the TEAM being acted on to avoid the penalty. Examples include:
>
>A. A Blue ROBOT, with twenty (20) seconds left in the MATCH, is parked in front of the middle face of the Blue TOWER. A Red ROBOT, attempting to SCALE that face, runs into the blocking Blue ROBOT. This results in a violation of G28 by the Blue ROBOT. Because the Red ROBOT was not solely making an attempt to cause that Blue ROBOT to violate G28, but rather to complete a Game Action (a SCALE), they are not in violation of G11.
>
>B. A Red ROBOT is parked in the NEUTRAL ZONE near the Blue SECRET PASSAGE. A Blue ROBOT pushes the Red ROBOT into the Blue SECRET PASSAGE, then drives away. There is no violation of G21 by the Red ROBOT, as the Red ROBOT was forced by the Blue ROBOT into the SECRET PASSAGE. The Blue ROBOT has violated G11 by forcing the Red ROBOT into the SECRET PASSAGE for the sole purpose of causing them to violate G21.
>
>C. A Red ROBOT is parked completely within the Blue SECRET PASSAGE. A Blue ROBOT, attempting to reach the Blue BRATTICE, makes contact with the Red ROBOT. The Red ROBOT receives a G21 penalty. There are no violations of G11 because the Blue ROBOT was trying to access their BRATTICE and not solely trying to cause the Red ROBOT to violate G21.
